twenty six computational methods, all but one are machine learning based.
Computational methods can be classified into three categories, sequenced
based, structure based, and combined. Among them, sequence-based
approaches are usually faster and cheaper, and have the advantage that
sequence information, unlike structure, is much more readily available.
Machine learning methods use feature groups to represent each
protein sequence. Widely used features such as position-specific scoring
matrix (PSSM), evolutionary conservation (ECO), putative relative solvent
accessibility (RSA) have been assessed in (Zhang et al., 2019b). Highscoring segment pair (HSP) has been used in previous methods for PPI
prediction (Li and Ilie, 2017). One-hot vectors (Zhang et al., 2019a;
Zeng et al., 2019) and amino acid embedding (Asgari and Mofrad, 2015;
Heinzinger et al., 2019; Asgari et al., 2019) have also been empirically
explored to represent protein sequences.
The learning structure is crucial to PPI binding sites classification
problems. Previously explored architectures include random forest (Wei
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2019), SVM (Wei et al., 2016), logistic
regression (Zhang and Kurgan, 2019), Bayes classifier (Murakami and
Mizuguchi, 2010), artificial neural networks (Singh et al., 2014). Recently,
convolutional neural network (CNN) (Zeng et al., 2019) and recurrent
neural network (RNN) (Zhang et al., 2019a) have also been applied to
solve this problem.
We introduce a new sequence-based PPI binding sites prediction
method, DELPHI (DEep Learning Prediction of Highly probable protein
Interaction sites), that combines a CNN and a RNN structure with fine
tuning technique. It uses twelve feature groups to represent protein
sequences including three novel features, high-scoring segment pair
(HSP), position information, and a reduced 3-mer amino acid embedding
(ProtVec1D). We have comprehensively compared DELPHI with nine
state-of-the-art programs on five datasets. DELPHI provides the best
predictions in all metrics.
The contributions of the DELPHI study are as follows. First, a novel
fine tuned ensemble model combing CNN and RNN is constructed.
Second, three novel features, which are believed to be used the first time
in PPI binding site prediction, are introduced. Third, a data processing and
feature construction suite, is provided, aiming to alleviating the difficulty
of tedious feature computation by the users.
A strong relationship is show between DELPHI¡¯s prediction of protein
binding sites and sites with a high degree of evolutionary conservation.
While this relationship is not expected to be exclusive many binding sites
will be conserved to maintain protein structure. This is demonstrated
with three different mammalian proteins. In addition, a comparison of
DELPHI¡¯s predictions are in strong agreement with known protein-binding
residues (PBRs) from the Pfam database.